Hitting the shuttle Columbia seconds after liftoff. As you watch it over and over you see it's clearer.
More detailed, more alarming than anything you've seen before. NASA couldn't believe simple phone could destroy an 89 ton spacecraft.
NASA was wrong.
You see to hit, you say, ow, that hurt. Doesn't that set off alarm bells?
It should have. We literally have dozens and dozens of pieces of evidence all pointing in the same direction.
Just today, new evidence about what caused the shuttle Columbia to break apart.
We have found the smoking gun.
I kept insisting we can't rule out a flight safety issue. In other words, we got the shuttle back before we've phoned damage.
So let's hope we can do it again.
It wasn't a hope. Hope was not a management method I'm familiar with at all.
It's really getting really pretty out there.
It's lost four separate temperature casters on the left side of the VF hole.
Look at the chunks coming off of it.
Something has gone terribly wrong here.
Like you say, block the doors.
It's one of those moments in your life where you say, I can't believe this is happening.
She goes, mom, is daddy okay? I said, sweetie, I don't think he has.
Looks like NASA has lost all seven astronauts.
This is all that is left of the space shuttle Columbia. Nearly 84,000 pieces of charred debris
are raved throughout a massive hangar at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
Over the next hour, you're going to hear the first hand minute by minute accounts of Columbia's last voyage
from the people who lived it and the people who investigated it.
Good evening. I'm Charles Gibson.
You have read the headlines and you saw the breakup.
But tonight for the first time, you will hear the inside story of Columbia's final mission.
We'll be back in 60 seconds.
There's flowers, music, photographer.
Everyone's going to see our smiles.
Before they're wedding, a hundred couples use new coldgate simply white night.
Once a night, it absorbs fast.
I just close my mouth and went to bed.
Fourteen days and they're whiter.
It's that easy.
New coldgate simply white night. Guaranteed.
Want to see fewer wrinkles but not ready for chemical meals or injections?
New Georgina Healthy Skin Anti-Rinkle Cream has retinal, essential for skin cell regeneration.
It's dermatologist proven to visibly reduce lines and wrinkles.
Would you use it?
I would.
New Georgina Healthy Skin Anti-Rinkle Cream.
Columbia, final mission returns.
Once again, Charles Gibson.
This really is the nerve center of NASA.
Mission control at the Johnson Space Center.
In Houston.
On the morning of February 1st, there were 20 engineers and flight directors in this room,
each of them monitoring thousands of bits of data coming back from the space shuttle Columbia.
After 16 days in space, the seven astronauts on the shuttle were just 32 minutes from touchdown.
February 1st, last night.
The first time we had a flight in the United States was a little bit of a big deal.
The ship was just in the past.
February 1st, 2003.
Landing day, 8.44 a.m.
Traveling at 17,000 miles an hour, Columbia begins its fiery descent through the Earth's atmosphere.
It's really neat to set bright orange yoke.
Out over the nose all around the oven.
Outside, the environment is unforgiving.
The temperature, 3000 degrees, super hot gases flicker like lightning.
Yeah, you definitely going to be outside now.
Maxion, GNC, you ready?
Right back, we're ready.
Gencies go.
Mission control has run through its checklist with Columbia Pilot Willie McCool.
And we're ready, Willie. No doubt this.
Copy that, I'll be there.
Flight director, Leroy Kane, is in charge.
When we came in that morning and began to get ready for our de-orbit preparation and entry activities.
It was right down the middle, normal.
Just under 30 minutes to touch down for Columbia now.
At Kennedy Space Center in Florida, family and onlookers gather near the runway.
John Clark, astronaut Laurel Clark's husband, is waiting with their eight-year-old son, Ian.
The kids are all out in the grass.
We're all running around and playing and having a blast.
Columbia's altitude now 54 miles, as it continues to descend into the atmosphere.
8.48 am.
Mechanical Systems Officer Jeff Kling is monitoring Columbia's descent.
Shuttle was very ready, systems wise to come in that the weather was perfect.
It was going to be an absolutely perfect entry.
At 8.54 am, Kling is the first to notice a problem and notifies Kane.
At 5.00 am, I'm just lost four separate temperature transducers on the left side of the vehicle.
Four high return temps.
Okay, is there anything common to them?
DSC or MDM or anything?
No commonality.
At about that time in Nevada, an amateur astronomer is filming the shuttle's reentry.
Here we come approaching Venus.
Whoa, holy crap, that was weird.
It's going really fast.
Just two minutes later, the shuttle is traveling over Arizona.
Another home video.
Look at the chunks coming off of it.
What the heck is that?
Small pieces of the shuttle are breaking off, but incredibly no one.
Neither mission control nor the crew is aware of it.
CNC flight.
By CNC.
Everything went good to you.
Control and rate and everything is nominal, right?
So far fly, we have good trims.
I don't see anything out of the ordinary.
Okay.
Then I lose some more sensors in the left wheel well.
The tires feel a little bit pressure on left outboard and left inboard both tires.
I felt that icy water in my veins.
Structural engineer Rodney Rocha is monitoring data in a back room with other engineers.
It went off in my head.
It's happening.
We're having a wing burn through.
We're having something terrible is happening in the wheel well.
8.59 a.m.
Mission control radios, Commander Rick Husband.
And Columbia Houston, we see your tire pressure messages and we did not copy your last.
The transmission suddenly falls off.
It's cut off right in the middle, just like that.
That got my attention because that is way out of the range of anything we ever had.
And flighty come.
Be calm.
I'll get four temperature sensors on the bottom line data that are off scale low.
The environmental officer says now she has lost some temperatures on the left side of the vehicle.
The data that I look at is no longer there.
A completely different system that they look at is no longer there.
A cascading event has happened on the left side of the vehicle and we're no longer communicating with it.
We're out of control in mission control.
Columbia Houston, Com Check.
Columbia Houston, UHF Com Check.
The second's become very long as I'm watching the clock.
It drags on.
Final one, you expecting tracking?
One minute ago flight.
We should have had air-to-ground communications and tracking and things.
When we didn't have that, that's when the butterflies started to appear, that sinking feeling and the pittier stomach.
Bill Reedy, a former astronaut and now a top NASA administrator, is waiting near the runway with his boss, NASA Chief Sean O'Keefe.
A look of absolute deep, deep concern on Bill Reedy's face told me everything before he said a word.
At Mission Control, Phil Engelof, a mission operations official, gets a call from a colleague who had just seen the shuttle breaking up over Texas.
Engelof shares the news with Kane.
The pilot is on the way to the airport.
GC flight.
Flight GC.
Block the doors.
Copy.
No data, no phone calls, no transmissions anywhere, into or out.
FCOH's contingency plan procedure.
FCOH's checklist.
It's one of those moments in your life where you say, I can't believe this is happening, but I realized that it really was happening, and that I still had a responsibility to lead the team through it.
Astronaut Rick Husband's wife Evelyn is waiting for him to land.
We watched the clock go to zero, and then it starts counting up again.
And you just, I don't know how to explain it, but you just have that sick, sick feeling.
Apparently it just appears that something happened with the orbiter.
I heard someone say we need to get the families back to crew quarters.
Laura grabs one of them, she goes, mom, is daddy okay?
I said sweetie, I don't think he is, but I don't know anything.
NASA says they have lost communication.
The head of flight crew comes in and he goes, we lost contact with the vehicle.
At the altitude that this happened, it's highly likely this is not survivable, but we don't have confirmation.
But I don't want to give you false hope.
There was a massive amount of crying and kids were screaming, it was horrible sounds.
Horrible.
Flight controllers here in Mission Control are securing all their information, notes and data, gathered from the spacecraft.
RCC, the rescue coordination center is mobilizing to that area, got me.
The thought went through my mind at a time that if somehow the crew module stayed intact long enough, and low enough, it's low enough that maybe some of the crew members could have got out.
Kane's tear says it all, there would be no miracles.
At 9.29am, NASA declares an emergency.
Video of the shuttle break up taken by a local TV station is broadcast nationally.
The very nature of what we do is we're there to help.
And there are literally hundreds and thousands of circumstances where we can help.
This was a day where I just felt very helpless.
Up next, for the first time, the engineer who tried to sound the alarm.
It appeared to me that we were hamstrung.
It just looked like we were hung out to drive.
Columbia, final mission, will return in a moment.
We're here to learn how to trust our wireless phones, which is hard because we've all been hurt before.
Johnny, we're accepting that our phones are unreliable.
That some features work here and not over there.
Try hugging the phone, not choking it.
Sprints is different. All your services work the same wherever you go.
On the most complete, all digital wireless network in the nation.
Like voicemail and email, even clear calls, I think we just made a breakthrough.
I'll see us from Sprint. Try the nation's most complete wireless network.
Now that's twisted. Like a bone refreshing jumble of fruit flavors in tropicala twister.
In totally jamming combos like watermelon strawberry swirl, twist things up.
Thank you, Parker.
Hello? Be right over.
The 2003 Toyota Corolla. Take the fun as far as you want to.
Took you long enough?
What's up? We need more chips now.
I'll go.
Introducing Red Lobsters World of Crab.
Sweet snow crab lakes prepared with a variety of delicious new recipes from around the world.
So how do you like your crab lakes?
We've got some of the cake on here.
It could really have an effect on you.
So come in today and try our new roasted cajun classic New England style or Asian garlic.
And share your love of crab legs now at Red Lobster.
Show it to her!
No fruits, no flowers, no colors, no scales.
Just pure moisture for healthier skin.
That's the magic of lubricant developed by dermatologist.
Lubriderms pure, uncomplicated formula gives you just the necessary ingredients you need.
And nothing you don't.
To keep dry skin at a distance every day.
Later, Gator.
Lubriderm.
A pure approach to healthier skin.
What do I want in the blade plug in?
Well, it'd be fresh.
What about a night fright?
A bright one.
That goes off when you don't need it.
And doesn't block my outlets.
Nobody else can say that.
Glaed plug ins extra outlet night light.
The only one that freshens brightens and doesn't block your outlets.
Plugin' in, plugin' in.
Now that's a bright idea.
Plugin' to extra outlet night light.
SC Johnson Family Company.
Hi. Hi.
Morgge application.
Me too.
Bye.
The Morgge application lists 80% less paperwork.
From Bank of America, higher standards.
Thursday, it's J-Lo.
Just days before her hot new movie,
co-starring her leading man band Opens, plug.
It's Lisa Marie Presley.
Thursday, it's Diane Sawyer with two supercharged divas.
It's too hot to miss.
It's prime time.
This cop's worst nightmare isn't the criminals.
It's having this rookie for a partner.
Do you pray?
Sometimes Christmas, you know, from a somewhere special.
Together, they're fighting crime.
When they're not fighting each other.
Do you have a piece of the liver to the car?
I'm hungry, sir.
Get out of here.
Tenning, a new trauma Sundays this fall on ABC.
Soon after the launch of Columbia,
NASA knew that a significant piece of foam had hit the shuttle.
But they didn't know it would lead to this.
An analysis during the mission concluded that there was no significant risk to the shuttle.
Some engineers, however, were worried,
one even begged for more information.
The astronauts on Columbia, meanwhile,
knew little of the problem.
We go back to the time before launch,
when everything seemed so perfect.
Here you can actually see Columbia on the side of the...
At Kennedy Space Center, Dr. Laurel Clark,
one of the astronauts makes this home video
for her eight-year-old son, Ian,
showing off the rocket that will lift her into space.
I can't wear a love-dew piece to it.
It won't be that long.
Two days later, January 16, 2003,
the astronauts take their last steps on Earth.
I mean, you watched the launch,
and you just really pray that everything goes well.
When Rick flew the first time in space,
I think I was much more aware of the risk.
We have a go for me and I should start.
Three, two, one.
We have booster ignition and lift-off
and space shuttle coming over that multitude of measurements.
Probably 80% of the concern is the first two minutes.
After that, my fears went away.
I probably let my guard down sooner than I should have.
Columbia now rolling on to the proper asthma for a 39-year-old.
All eyes follow the shuttle as it streaks toward the heavens.
Columbia, you sent your go at the throttle up.
We're going to go at the throttle up.
Everything looking good on board, Columbia.
It seems like the perfect lift-off.
No one realizes that Columbia and its crew
may have just suffered a fatal blow.
Eight and a half minutes later,
as the shuttle glides into its orbit,
the crew has no way of knowing that 16 days from now,
there will be no way home.
Day two, January 17th,
Mission Control wakes up the crew with a song.
Congratulations on your first wake up in space.
Hey, good morning.
The astronauts are starting more than 140 science experiments.
On the ground, analysts begin a routine review of the launch films.
But at 81.7 seconds into the flight,
they are stunned at what they see.
A large chunk of insulation, foam,
breaks off the external fuel tank
and slams into Columbia,
exploding into a shower of particles.
Word spreads quickly.
NASA engineer Rodney Rocha gets a call from a colleague.
She tells me, Rodney, do you know that something hit the wing on asset?
And I must have gasped audibly
because she told me I did later.
That night Rocha sees the video for the first time.
He has seen foam hits before,
but this one is much bigger.
He plays the video over and over.
It looked like it was potentially serious.
So I was very anxious to know more.
NASA assembles a team of dozens of engineers,
including Rocha, to assess the damage.
It's estimated that the foam piece weighs about two pounds
and is traveling at over 500 miles an hour.
But the video is grainy.
The impact hard to see.
Basic information is unavailable.
The team of experts
kept reiterating or emphasizing
that we needed a better image.
Day six, Rocha sends an urgent email
to engineering managers and behalf of the team.
Can NASA get better pictures of the shuttle
using ground-based telescopes or spy satellites?
The email is blunt.
Can we petition big for outside agency assistance?
And I deliberately boldface that statement
because I want it to be an attention-gitter.
It were really serious here.
We really, really need this.
Rocha never gets an answer.
The next day he learns that shuttle managers
have no intention of asking the military
to take photos of Columbia in orbit.
I was flabbergasted.
I was stunned.
What could this mean?
Why? It doesn't say why.
It seems to imply we already know an answer.
We already have it figured out.
We already know what we're going to do.
You're just kind of a sideline show.
As it turns out, the engineering team's request
for photos from the military isn't turned down.
It's never passed on to the shuttle managers
who might act on it.
NASA says pictures are requested only in emergencies.
We didn't think it was an emergency.
Without a photo, it appeared to me
that we were hamstrung.
It just looked like we were hung out to drive.
Word of the decision sparks new emails
from worried engineers.
Veteran landing gear expert Carlisle Campbell writes,
quote, there is lots of speculation.
Could we get a burn through into the wheel well upon entry?
There was always that lingering concern.
Is everything going to be okay?
There's a rain Houston, what a wonderful thought.
They ate, onboard the Columbia,
the crew wakes up to Akuna Matata,
a song about no worries.
And it's really good day to wake up today
and nothing to worry about.
A lot of work to do.
The astronauts are relaxed, even playful.
They have no idea about the foam hit on liftoff.
But here comes that day's round after two.
As you know, he used to be in the circus.
So he's very, very happy.
On the ground, engineers led by Boeing,
a major NASA contractor,
are completing a foam damage analysis
to be distributed that day.
Steve Oswald is a senior vice president at Boeing.
The conclusion that we came up with
was that the damage expected damage
from that foam strike was not going to be a safety flight issue,
but may cause some damage to the orbiter
that would have to be fixed before the next flight.
But is the report reliable?
There are disturbing questions.
The analysis focused on potential damage to the tiles
on the underside of the shuttle's wing,
not the wing's leading edge.
It would be a critical mistake.
And there's another problem.
The size of the foam piece that hit the shuttle
is estimated to be far larger than anything ever tested,
600 times larger.
Brian O'Connor is NASA's highest ranking safety official
and a former astronaut.
The report says a flight condition is significantly
outside of test database.
Which means we don't have any test,
which would really show us what kind of an effect
this big of foam hit would have.
That's right.
So, is it fair to have reached the conclusion then
that there was no safety of flight issue?
Uh, and I'm going to say in retrospect, probably not.
Late in day eight, for the first time,
astronauts learn of the foam hit.
They are sent this grainy video
and an email that dismisses the foam hit as, quote,
not even worth mentioning.
There is absolutely no concern.
On day nine, Rocha attends a critical meeting
where the damage assessment is summarized for top shuttle managers.
While the foam impact had been discussed previously
at this meeting, there's no debate, no probing questions.
ABC News has obtained a transcript of a discussion
of the foam hit at the meeting.
Chairwoman Linda Ham says, quote,
no safety of flight and no issue for this mission,
nothing that we are going to do different.
And I remember a pause and her looking around the room.
Like, it's okay to say something now, but no one did.
I just couldn't do it.
I was too low down here in the organization
and she's way up here.
You are duty bound as a member of this team
to voice your concerns in particular
as they relate to safety of flight.
Columbia's flight director, Leroy Kane, says there's no excuse
for not speaking up.
If you're really worried about it,
you stand up in that meeting and you holler to your herd.
Yeah, and quite frankly, you wouldn't have to holler.
You stand up and you say, here's my concern.
Here's why it's my concern and I'm not comfortable.
But Rocha says he couldn't challenge the report.
He had no data, no pictures, nothing to substantiate his concerns.
So on day 11, he even reluctantly agrees
there is no safety of flight issue.
It does look like a contradiction.
I was struggling to be okay with it.
Because I really did believe the team did a competent job.
The best they could do.
But subconsciously or nagging at me underneath all of that
was we might be wrong.
But the decision had been made.
The photo request killed.
The analysis, wrong as it was, accepted.
You put it behind you and you move on to the next thing.
Because there always is the next thing.
And I believe in this case, in the end,
I fully believe that every single person in the organization
was in agreement that we did not have a safety of flight issue.
On their next to last day in space,
the crew wakes up to John Lennon's imagine.
Earlier in their final press conference,
Commander Rick Husband had praised the entire NASA team.
The bigger team who makes this entire mission possible
is the team on the ground.
The pilot's first astronaut Ilan Ramon made a wish for peace
as the shuttle passed over his troubled part of the world.
I wish we will have a peaceful and
for living very soon.
Payload specialist Mike Anderson said he hopes their experiments
will make a difference.
The scientists are spectacular and we just can't wait to bring it
all home so the scientists can really take it close to what we've done.
In the final family teleconference,
Laurel Clark promised her son she'd be home soon.
I love you both.
Give each other hugs so I can keep on with your patience.
It was the last time Ilan would ever see his mother alive.
Bye!
Thanks, Bob.
Thanks to you.
Coming up, inside the investigation into what went wrong
in a daring rescue plan, could the astronauts have been saved?
You try a rescue.
You must.
Columbia, final mission.
We'll be back after this.
From city to city, state to state and coast to coast,
Verizon Wireless is helping to bring families closer together
with unlimited night and weekend minutes.
It's all part of the America's Choice National Family Share Plan,
giving your family unlimited night and weekend minutes
to share on up to four separate lines so they can say,
whatever, whenever, wherever.
And now, safe big on Select LG phones.
Verizon Wireless, we never stop working for you.
Come rain or shine. Can you hear me now?
Good.
Have you been quilting long, Wanda?
No, this is just a part-time gig for me, kid.
I don't even like quilting.
How can you say that?
We specially craft every sheet of quilting northern
with two quilted pies of softness, strength, and absorbency.
To leave you feeling clean.
Kids.
Oh, loose.
What?
You girls need to get a life life.
Goodness, what a nightmare.
Quilted Northern.
It's all in the quilting.
Bring the view to your hometown.
Visit quilted northern.com to learn how.
Great, great, great.
Okay, got the order.
You want something made?
I'm going to go with K.
My wonder of deficit.
Hey, you're welcome.
Don't these look yummy?
I made them myself.
You just have to try one.
It'll give you hard burns so bad.
It'll melt the buttons right off your shirt.
It's different for people with acid reflux disease.
And all that acid reflux may have puckered the lining of your esophagus.
You should ask your doctor about the purple pill called nexium.
And these?
These are sure to send you home early.
For many people, with one prescription nexium daily,
hard burn goes away and stays away.
And could keep you up all night?
And nexium relief goes deeper to heal erosions in the esophagus
acid reflux can cause.
So you don't just feel better.
You are better.
Other serious stomach conditions may still exist.
Doctor to your doctor.
Nexium has a low occurrence of side effects,
including headache, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
Don't let acid reflux spoil the party.
Doop!
Relief?
Healing?
Nexium.
As the heat rises in the city, so does the crime.
Gone!
There's only one way to cool it down.
Police!
NYB Nebulu ABC Tuesday 109 Central.
Friday, finally, Angelina Tollie talks about her strange marriage.
Do you talk to Belbron?
And all the strange rumors.
Do you consider yourself bisexual?
Friday, its Angelina's wild life.
You're going to get me to cry.
I will not let you cry.
On 2020.
If your loved one was aboard a space shuttle
and mission control knew there was no way home,
would you want them to know?
Would you want to know?
We'll ask three NASA legends and the astronauts' families.
Columbia, final mission continues after this from our ABC stations.
I'm Carly Gugino and I'm playing Karen Sisko.
Karen Sisko is a formidable opponent.
She will take you down.
She's a US marshal.
Sexy and tough.
She can hold her own with any guy.
She's an incredibly competent woman.
And inside, she's a really tough little girl.
She wants to have a life.
Always hoping that the person who comes around the corner
is going to be Mr. Wright.
But they're usually Mr. Rome.
From executive producer Danny DeVita, Karen Sisko follows the bachelor.
ABC Wednesdays this fall.
The
World's End
We need your team to check out something that came in hot this morning.
They have many enemies.
Somebody else got through.
They have only one mission.
They know the drill.
Get the information and you get back here.
To keep us safe.
ABC presents a powerful new trauma.
Like somebody wanting to blow up school.
Either tariffs sent by tariffs.
We're running out of time.
You are at a time.
Red Matrix Thursdays this fall on ABC.
And now from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, Charles Gibson.
This is the kind of foam we're talking about.
And it's hard to believe that a piece of this stuff weighing about two pounds, 20 inches long
could actually cause the breakup of an 89 tons spacecraft.
But after months of analysis, investigators believe that's exactly what happened.
The foam would have hit the leading edge of the shuttle's left wing in about this area.
And it's this reconstructed wing with actual pieces of the shuttle suspended behind plastic
that led investigators to their theory of what happened to Columbia in its final moments.
As the shuttle approached the California coast at more than 23 times,
the speed of sound, its reentry was normal until 8.52 a.m.
Superheated gas or plasma entered the breach in the shuttle's left wing.
The wing began to melt from the inside out.
The crew had no idea that small pieces of debris were falling away from the shuttle.
Over a four minute period, more than 160 measurements failed.
As the plasma burned through, the left wing and wheel well, like a runaway fire hose.
The miracle may have been that Columbia kept flying normally for so long.
But by 9 a.m., America's longest flying shuttle was disintegrating over Texas.
The men and women of the Columbia had journeyed more than six million miles.
And were minutes away from arrival and reunion.
Today we remember not only one moment of tragedy, but seven lives of great purpose and achievement.
As the world grieved along with the astronauts' families, a blue ribbon board,
the top accident investigators in the country, assembled in Houston.
Their first job to recover the evidence, in the end 84,000 pieces of twisted metal glass and plastic,
spread out over more than 250 miles.
Over 15,000 people joined the biggest ground search ever.
Each find was precious, an astronaut's helmet, a mission patch.
And most crucial of all, the shuttle's intact flight data recorder.
That data recorder, plus forensic clues from the debris, pointed investigators for the first time.
To the wing's leading edge, as the spot where the foam hit,
retired Admiral Harold Gamern heads up the investigative board.
We literally have dozens and dozens of pieces of evidence all pointing in the same direction.
And we have no evidence, which points in any other direction.
So to us, that's pretty compelling.
The board kept enhancing the video of the foam strike.
And with each clearer image, the hit looked more ominous.
There's nothing terribly mysterious about the fact that a piece of foam, this big,
going 700 feet per second, can do a lot of damage to whatever it hits.
Retired NASA engineer Robert Thompson is one of the space shuttle's original architects.
That's equivalent of taking a 200 pound way to 100 feet in the air and dropping it on you.
It hurts.
But the case of the falling foam, no matter how convincing, was still circumstantial.
So the board conducted a series of tests.
One is recently as today, firing foam pieces the same size that broke off Columbia's fuel tank
into the leading edge of ring panels from another shuttle.
We have found the smoking gun.
You know, it was a visceral reaction.
You know, it was shortly followed by, oh my god.
The test confirmed the foam struck with enough force to open a hole in the wing panel.
The panel made of a substance called reinforced carbon carbon or RCC.
I think foam hitting the wing leading edge of the orbiter at 500 miles an hour is the direct cause.
Investigators were stunned to learn that foam was breaking off the fuel tank and hitting the orbiter
on every single shuttle flight, every one.
In fact, just three months before Columbia, there had been a close call.
A large chunk of foam narrowly mistitting the shuttle Atlantis after breaking off the same exact part of the fuel tank.
Bill Redi is the associate administrator at NASA.
We had the engineers go off and do the analysis on that.
They arrived at the conclusion that there was no way for foam to get from this area on the tank to this area and strike the orbiter.
But that analysis turned out to be straight out wrong.
It may turn out in the end that it was in error.
Actually, NASA had been given repeated warnings.
This internal NASA document written three years ago showing that foam was a high-risk safety concern.
And this report commissioned by NASA in 1990 saying that the tiles and protective panels on the shuttle could fail because of hits from debris in particular pieces of insulation or foam from the external tank.
They had become accustomed to foam coming off and hitting the thermal protection system.
It had happened on every flight.
This was not deemed to be abnormal and so therefore an acceptable risk.
In other words, we got the shuttle back before with foam damage to the tiles or the leading edge.
So let's hope we can do it again.
And the scope of the damage that had been assessed was really quite insignificant in the judgment of the engineering and analysis team.
Now, again, that may prove to be a judgment call we call into question here.
But it wasn't a hope. Hope is not a management method I'm familiar with at all.
Okay?
The foam had been defined early on as not a threat to flight safety.
And even though the amount of damage increased, they continued to define it that way.
Diane Vaughn is a consultant to the investigative board.
She spent 10 years studying NASA's culture after the Challenger disaster.
She says the same thing happened back then.
Only instead of foam, it was O-rings.
And once again with Columbia, a NASA didn't see the danger until it was too late.
I don't believe it's this foam. It's got to be something else that we don't know about yet.
Ron did more set at the time. We analyzed it and we understood it. We were comfortable with that.
And comfortable is not really what you want to be.
Comfortable is what they became with Challenger.
But most disturbing of all was what the board concluded about NASA's overall safety organization.
That budget cuts and other factors had left it dangerously inadequate.
You said they don't have people. They don't have money. They don't have engineering.
They don't have expertise and they don't have analysis.
That's correct. That's pretty damning.
That's right.
And you said when you really look at it closely, there's no there, there.
On paper it looks great. And there is a name and a telephone number in the desk
to do everything that needs to be done in the safety organization.
But they are very, very shallow.
NASA says they have more than 1700 people devoted to safety.
And that whenever they find a problem, they fix it.
In my experience, having gotten to NASA after the Challenger and been in the first astronaut class selected,
I have never seen any evidence of complacency. Quite the opposite.
But the investigative board will insist that NASA fundamentally reassess how safety concerns are communicated.
There is no excuse investigators say for the engineers warnings to not have reached top shuttle managers.
The professional system by which professional engineers express, express legitimate safety concerns
up the chain of command, that system broke.
It wasn't just the foam debris hit.
If that's what it turns out to be, that took Columbia out of the sky.
It was also a failure of the organizational system.
It's a tragedy because people at NASA, like Rodney Rocha,
all of them are going to spend their lives.
What if I had done this? What if I had done this?
Not seeing themselves as part of an organizational system that failed.
NASA says it will implement everything the board recommends and go further.
Last week, Linda Hamm, who chaired that critical meeting where a decision was made
that there was no safety of flight issue from the foam hit, was reassigned,
along with several other top shuttle managers.
NASA emphasizes that they're not blaming any particular individual,
and says that it's easier to criticize after the fact than to make real-time decisions.
Best guess.
When do you flag it?
The answer is as soon as we can do so safely, we've got to find first what the problem was and we're really close.
It's getting very, very close.
But can the shuttle be made fail safe?
After all, you're harnessing 23 times the power of the Hoover Dam
and flying nine times faster than a rifle bullet.
We believe that the shuttle can be made reasonably safe to fly.
It'll never be safe.
If you don't fail, you haven't pushed it to a limit.
For John Clark, these plasma scarred mementos from his wife Laurel,
recovered in the wreckage, aren't a sign of failure, but a badge of honor.
I'm glad she got to do what she loved to do.
Was it worth a life?
It's the loss is huge for us.
My son not having a mom, he not having a wife.
I think in reality, though, to be able to live your dream,
is worth a life.
And she's a source of inspiration to our son forever and ever.
He will have this sense of pride that my mom gave her all,
gave her life in the pursuit of a dream that others could benefit from that.
It's a precious thing.
One critical question might something have been done
to rescue the astronauts.
Some now say maybe that question of whether the crew could have been saved
when we come back.
You're a survenge.
Thanks Jim.
Is the worry of West Nile virus sending your outdoor activities indoors?
Take back your backyard with off-hanging mosquito lantern.
The candle activates the repellent.
The candle is a little bit more than a candle.
The candle activates the repellent pad,
which protects an area 15 times greater than citronella candles.
Off-hanging mosquito lantern keeps bugs off.
Bring the same glowing protection to your Decker patio with off-maskido lamp.
Hey, Bob.
You get a new haircut?
No.
Hey, Bob.
Hey.
Did you miss weight?
Did you jack a bump?
Nope.
What's different?
He finally asked his doctor about Niagara.
Ready to ask your doctor about Niagara for the first time.
Find out if a free sample is right for you.
To learn more, visit Viagra.com.
Call the sitter and walk the dog.
That's not a doctor.
Ask your doctor and see the difference.
We're here to learn how to trust our wireless phones,
which is hard because we've all been hurt before.
Johnny, we're accepting that our phones are unreliable.
We're here and not over there.
Try hugging the phone, not choking it.
Okay.
Sprints is different.
All your services work the same wherever you go.
On the most complete,
all digital wireless network in the nation.
Like, voicemail and email?
Even clear calls.
I think we just made a breakthrough.
PCS from Sprint.
Try the nation's most complete wireless network.
Hello?
Be right over.
The 2003 Toyota Corolla.
Take the fun as far as you want to.
Took you long enough?
What's up?
When you want chips, ma'am.
I'll go.
At Philip Morris, USA,
we understand that people want to know where we stand
on important tobacco issues.
On our website, you can find out.
For example, we agree that there is no safe cigarette.
Cigarette smoking is addictive and causes serious diseases,
including lung cancer, heart disease, and emphysema.
The only proven way to reduce the health risks of smoking is to quit.
For more, including links to sites that can help smokers quit,
visit Philip MorrisUSA.com or call for a copy of excerpts from the site.
I'm a player in the National Football League.
But that is not who I am.
I'm a member of a community.
Dedicated to making it dedicated to making a difference.
I'm a player in a National Football League.
It's summer.
He's looking at murder one.
It's the city of angels.
Call the DA.
And it's getting a little crazy.
Big God, I'm going to kill you to kill Jason Beale.
The best place for drama on Saturday night is pregnant.
ABC Saturday, 10-9 central.
Every morning, the president reads one report first.
This top secret document updates all threats against America.
This report is called the Threat Matrix.
ABC presents a powerful new drama about our team protecting America.
Brad Matrix comes in Thursdays this fall's ABC.
It goes without saying that NASA would have done anything possible to save the Columbia astronauts.
Had the extent of damage to the shuttle been known.
But it is accepted here that neither rescue of the astronauts nor repair of the shuttle in space could have succeeded.
Which is why many were surprised when the investigating board suggested that attempting a rescue might have been an option.
Really?
It's a haunting question for the astronaut families.
Is there any way Columbia's crew could have repaired the damage?
Or if not, could they have been rescued?
If something could have been done, then all of a sudden it's not just a golden opportunity that was missed.
It actually is a very, very serious failure of the system.
That's why the investigative board asked NASA to look back at what might have been done if, if they had known early enough, the Columbia was in danger.
They came up with a rescue scenario. NASA would launch another shuttle, Atlantis, to rendezvous with Columbia.
The two ships would orbit as close as 50 feet apart, their open payload bay doors facing each other.
A tethered astronaut would perform a carefully choreographed spacewalk carrying extra spacesuits to Columbia's crew and then escorting them two at a time back to Atlantis.
Now empty, the Columbia would be crashed into the ocean by remote control.
This would have been a very, very risky operation with a limited chance of success.
We brought together three NASA legends to ask what might have been done.
All right, let's get to meet.
Story Muskray flew six shuttle missions and performed a spectacular spacewalk to repair the Hubble Telescope.
Commander Charlie Bolden flew four shuttle missions including one on Columbia before becoming a top NASA safety official.
And Jerry Griffin, former director of the Johnson Space Center, was a flight director and mission control for Apollo 13, the legendary flight, where a seemingly doomed crew was saved.
I'm starting with the premise that alarm bells have been set off and there is a concern that this crew is in danger and at that point, with that what if? What do you do?
It take a walk. I say it's simple.
For story Muskray, it is inconceivable that NASA did not consider sending an astronaut on a spacewalk to look at the damage.
Any breach in the wing might have been small, but he says they would have seen it.
You come up with a choreography to dance to do it. Over 30 years, I have designed and developed over 100 spacewalks.
This is the easiest one that I ever dealt with.
I could put an astronaut eyes four feet below the leading edge of the wing and sweep those eyes along the whole thing.
You could see something that's high.
Of course. Basically, I would put it right here in front of a human eye right there.
But Charlie Bolden says it is not that simple. If you do not know to look specifically at the leading edge or RCC.
I never suspected in my wildest imagination that anything would have either penetrated or caused damage to the RCC.
So I would have never looked there to be quite honest.
But even if the trained spacewalkers aboard Columbia, Michael Anderson or Dave Brown had seen the damage, could they have repaired it?
Intuitively, and all I know about is there is no repair possible. It's a rescue. You try a rescue.
Yes. You must.
But few in NASA or in the astronaut community think rescue was realistic.
Even if Columbia's crew took extreme measures to conserve oxygen, the shuttle Atlantis would have had to been rushed into orbit, violating NASA's own safety procedures.
I just would not hurry that process to the point where I thought I was iffy on launching that second vehicle.
I think it would be putting four more lives at risk and another orbiter at risk.
As a manager, what do I have to have to be convinced to do this? I need to understand what damage to Columbia in the first place and why.
Let me take you to the what if that I think everybody in the country has thought about.
You have determined that a rescue mission or that a repair will not work.
Do you tell the crew?
I've agonized over this. I still don't know. If I would have wanted to have been told that we don't think you're going to make it.
We seldom ever held anything back from the crew that we knew for certain. If there was something that we had looked at and that we were very concerned about, I would tell them that.
But I would also give them in this case, the Columbia case, is that we think you're okay. They obviously did. I wasn't there, but they obviously thought they were okay.
The astronauts' families seemed content that their loved ones didn't know.
Hindsight is great. We can go back and say, oh, we could do this now or maybe we should have done this, but at the time nobody knew that.
And so it doesn't make any difference at this point. I'm glad he didn't know.
Whether they told them or not while they were on orbit doesn't really change the outcome of what happened. He knew more than I did about the risk, but yet he wanted to do it. He felt like they were contributing and he wanted to be a part of that.
My personal feeling is that I am very satisfied that the way it is played out, that they didn't know. They were successful in the mission in every way except that it didn't get home.
Many of the astronauts' families told us the one thing they're sure of is that their loved ones would want the shuttle program to continue that this disaster should in no way limit NASA's exploration of space.
When we come back, Columbia Final Mission continues with some thoughts on the future of America's space program.
I have lost over 50 pounds on the slimfast plan.
I wasted way too much time being fed. Look at me. It's about feeling good and having energy.
Anybody who's got a taste bud will find something they like. I lost over 50 pounds on the slimfast plan. Don't wait another day. Do it now.
Success after success after success after success.
At Office Depot, you'll find all the school supplies your child needs to achieve success.
This proves the entire story into my measure is discovered in New Galaxy named Prima Mother.
Of course, some of it is up to him. Office Depot, because how you prepare your kids for school can have a lot to do with how they actually do in school.
You know how you always say you could make a meal just out of our soft garlic breadsticks, fresh hot soups and crisp garden salad.
You can. The unlimited soup salad and breadsticks lunch. 595, that olive garden.
Good idea. Great meal.
North can give our H.A.A. as much as wrinkles.
Loss of firmness.
Nutrigena visibly firm. The only moisturizer that replenishes copper.
The collagen building mineral is essential for firm skin.
Want to be firmer here? Here. Here? I do. Nutrigena visibly firm.
Very shortly, the Columbia Accident Investigation Board will deliver its final report on the Shuttle disaster.
That report will come down very hard on NASA, saying that shuttle managers had grown complacent about foam hits over the years.
That on this flight they had failed to seriously consider the possibility of damage to the leading edge of the Shuttle's wing.
And that overall NASA's safety program had become an empty shell.
They will also ask some basic questions about the Shuttle program.
Whether the Shuttle has outlived its usefulness. What is the next generation of space vehicles? And where do we go from here?
Good questions. Now NASA says it can fix the hardware and get the Shuttle flying again early next year.
But the Columbia disaster has given a pause for people to consider where do we go from here?
It is a question that ought to be on the National Agenda.
I'm Charles Gibson at the Kennedy Space Center. Thanks for watching and for all of us at ABC News. Good night.
This has been a presentation of ABC News. More Americans get their news from ABC News than from any other source.